[Transcript missing]
All right.
Welcome to session 405,
Geometry and Modeling.
My name is Todd Previt.
I'm the 3D graphics
TTS engineer for Apple.
What we're going to be going through
today is a study of the implementation
of complex animated geometries.
Any of you who have downloaded any of
our sample code from the web are probably
familiar with the multicolored square.
For most of our OpenGL demonstrations,
there's always a spinning square that we
use to illustrate any particular concept.
Well, today, I'm going to move from that
into a complex animated
geometry in the form of a model.
You see our little marine
here on the screen.
I'm going to explain basically
what goes into rendering one
of these things to the screen.
I'll get into coordinate systems first.
One of the things that was kind of a
challenge for me when I was first getting
into OpenGL was that there's so many
different versions of coordinate systems
that go into any type of 3D rendering.
You have your texture coordinates,
which are normally described in 2D
space as they apply to a 2D texture.
These days, though,
we now have what are called 3D textures,
which is a layered texture.
So you can actually have
three-dimensional texture coordinates.
But the ones we'll be discussing
today are two-dimensional.
We also have model coordinates,
or model or object coordinates,
that describe an object within
the scope of its own space,
as in relative to the
centroid of the model.
World coordinates are a global reference.
It really defines how objects relate
to one another in the scope of the
world that you are rendering them in.
And finally,
I-coordinates are the result of a
Model-View matrix transformation
on model coordinates to put them
in pseudo-world coordinate space.
This kind of gives you an
example of coordinates here.
You can see the triangular slice
out of the texture on the left-hand
image as it applies to a model here.
It kind of illustrates what
texture coordinates do.
These vertices here at the edges
all have a texture coordinate that
maps directly into that image.
I just happen to select that portion
of it as it maps onto this model here.
So what's in a model format?
Well, you have vertices,
texture coordinates, triangles,
and textures.
Those are the basic things
that you need to store a model,
load it back from disk,
and render it on the screen.
Your vertices are just
an array of three floats,
or doubles, however you want to
represent your coordinates.
In a moment,
I'll discuss a particularly interesting
technique that was used by id Software to
render their models for Quake 2.
But that's really all it is.
It's just a simple array of three floats
that describe a vertex in 3D space.
Texture coordinates,
as I went through just a moment ago,
are an array of two floats, or doubles,
whatever you prefer to use.
These apply directly to the
texture in its own space.
Now, with texture coordinates,
they're not always equal
to the number of vertices.
It doesn't sound right.
How can you have more than one
texture coordinate per vertex?
I'll show you.
As you can see,
I've highlighted the vertices
on these two triangles here with
the red line down the middle,
which illustrates the shared
edge the two triangles have.
You can either have texture
coordinates that are based per vertex,
or you can have them that are
based on a per-triangle vertex.
If you have them per vertex,
and you have two different
textures on each triangle,
you're going to end up with
some pretty interesting results.
Unless you go out of your
way to make it happen.
You're going to find that the texture
coordinates from one don't map
directly into the image of the other.
So you'll come out with some pretty
interesting looking textures if you share
texture coordinates amongst vertices.
The alternative to that,
to make things look right
with two different textures,
is to have texture coordinates assigned
on a per-triangle vertex basis.
At that point, each triangle vertex,
even though it's shared,
has its own set of texture coordinates.
So therefore,
you can have two different textures
on the two different triangles and
not screw up the texture coordinates.
Again, we'll go back to this.
All your triangles are an array of vertex
coordinates and texture coordinates.
Uh... that applies to... they're usually
indices into the aforementioned arrays
of vertices and texture coordinates.
Uh... It keeps things fairly easy and
For loading purposes,
you're better off using indices
instead of actual hard-coded vertices.
Textures themselves are just the image
data stored in whatever format you like,
whichever you happen to want to prefer.
I do know that id for Quake 2
happened to use the PCX format.
These days,
a lot of people are going back
to using BMPs and GIF files.
JPEGs are not used a lot because
of the compression schemes
that are involved in them.
You tend to lose a lot of image quality,
so they tend to be avoided.
So as I said,
I've been kind of mentioning
id here and there,
but the case study we're going
to be going through today is
for the Quake 2 model format,
which is .md2.
I chose this format for
a number of reasons.
It's publicly available.
There's a ton of information
on the web that you can get.
It is fairly well documented,
although as I learned just recently,
it's not quite as well
documented as I thought it was.
There's also a lot of models
that are readily available.
You can download them almost anywhere,
and there's a ton of them out there.
So what does the header file for this,
for an MD2 look like?
Well that's it.
Doesn't look like there's
a whole lot there.
You'll notice that it's
actually a structure of 17 ints.
Makes it really easy to load in.
It comes out to 68 bytes.
So you just,
all you have to do is put your file
pointer at the beginning of the file,
load in the first 68 bytes,
and you have a complete description of
what the rest of the file looks like.
I've highlighted here the
elements that are actually
relevant to our discussion today.
Magic conversion, those are, I believe,
specific to id.
The offsets are kind
of interesting though.
They specify the offsets of
the various data points from
the beginning of the file.
Well if you read in the file
in its entirety in memory,
they also become the offsets
to that data in memory.
So how is this data actually represented?
Well, there's a lot of supporting data
structures that go into the MD2 format,
and I'll be going through
some of those right now.
The triangle vertex T is,
as I mentioned in the overview slide,
this is our structure that will
describe any given triangle vertex.
What you have is,
you've got three vertices
that are in a byte.
And you also got a byte which
describes the light normal index,
which is not relevant
to our discussion today.
The triangle data is then--
The first step is to integrate
two arrays of indices into
the vertex and triangle data.
Now I know I said that
vertices are floats or doubles,
some kind of floating point
number that you can use,
right?
What these are,
they're an encoded byte coordinate.
In order to conserve space,
It decided to pack all of
its vertex data into bytes.
This makes it really easy to go
cross-platform when you're switching
from BigIndian to LittleIndian because
you don't have to do anything with these.
They're already--it's
just a--it's a byte,
no swapping required,
can be loaded by any machine.
Also, having the vertices in such a small
space means that they can be very,
very tightly packed.
You notice that each of these structures
are actually only four bytes in length.
Well, four bytes, 32 bits,
size of a long.
The other aspect of it is,
why do they encode them in a byte?
Because it allows for very easy scaling
and translation of any given vertex.
So Jeff mentioned earlier in his
presentation about how OpenGL is very,
very good at scaling and rotating things
with just a simple transform matrix.
Same concept applies here.
Our texture data is stored as file names.
It's pretty basic.
You just load in the texture
as you would any other file.
The preferable method on Mac OS X is
to use Qt New GeoWield from Pointer,
which sets up a non-padded GeoWield that
you can then direct OpenGL to to suck in
the texture and apply it to your model.
Some little caveats about this:
for any given MD2 file,
the skin width and skin
height will be the same.
You can have as many skins as you like,
but they all have to be of the same size.
Your texture coordinates:
small struct of two shorts,
the S and T coordinates.
There's really not much
more to it than that.
Those describe the coordinates of
the slice of the texture that you're
going to be using for whichever
vertex texture coordinates apply to.
This is relevant to animation,
which is your frame data.
On a per-frame basis,
this is what you get when you're
dealing with the MD2 format.
You've got a scale and a translate,
and those are the two that
I want to focus on for a moment.
As I mentioned,
OpenGL is very good at scaling
and translating just using
very simple matrix transforms.
These are the values that we'll use and
apply to the byte vertices to get them to
the actual positions that we want them.
The name segment of this is just
whatever you happen to want to name
the frame for tracking your animations.
And then the triangle T vertices.
This is kind of interesting
because it's only one vertex.
Or it's only one vertex.
But what it actually is,
is a pointer to a whole array of vertices
that are allocated on a per-frame basis.
So, what you end up with here is that
each frame will have the exact same
number of vertices for any given MD2.
This is how I chose to set
up a storage of an MD2 file.
Four elements: we have the header,
frames, triangles,
and texture coordinates.
You don't have to set it up this way,
and I'd like to point out
that this does leave out a
significant chunk of the MD2 file,
that being the GL commands,
which were not exactly relevant,
at least to this discussion.
So here's a little pseudocode
about loading from loading in MG2.
The first thing is you want to
obviously find and open the file.
And then you'll read in the header,
as described on the slide here.
You read it in,
copy it to the-- once you have
your copy of it in memory,
you can now directly access it to
get to any of the data that you need,
such as the offsets of the frames.
...like this.
And then you can allocate your
memory for your frames here,
and then read in the data to your, uh,
then you read the, excuse me,
and you'll read the data
in from the file into your,
into your data structures and memory.
So drawing models.
Well, there's a really basic loop that
you want to use whenever you want
to draw your models on screen.
After setting everything up,
you have your GL context,
you have your viewport,
you perform your camera transformations.
So you're looking at the
proper place in space.
Then you're going to push that
matrix so you can save it.
You'll transform your model
to place it where you want it.
You'll draw it.
You're going to pop that matrix back off,
and that will return you to the
basic camera transformation so
you're right back where you started.
And then you continue the
next iteration of the loop,
and you can go through it for the
however many models you happen to have.
This is kind of a graphical
representation of what it looks like.
After the camera transform,
you push the matrix,
transform your model, draw it,
pop the matrix back off,
return right around again for
however many models you've got.
After you perform all of this,
you continue with any other
rendering stuff that you want to do.
This is kind of a pseudo-code
representation of what a scene
rendering routine would look like.
The highlighted code specifies the
loop that I just described for you,
where the push matrix and pop matrix
surround the model drawing routine.
One thing I didn't talk
about was animation.
This would actually only render
one frame of any animation,
which happened to be frameNum.
If you wanted to render
each individual frame,
the model itself would probably
have to have some kind of rendering
routine that would animate through
whatever frame sequence you wanted
to perform the given animation.
So how are we going to draw that model?
Well, this is, again,
a pseudocode representation
of how you might do it.
First, we start with the vertex indices,
vi,
and the actual vertex we're going to use,
vtx.
And we start with triangles.
Now these loops are kind of strange,
and while we were writing
the code for this,
the language that we used to
try and describe it became very,
very convoluted very quickly,
as you'll find out momentarily.
So what we have here is for
each triangle in the header,
Skip down one.
Now for each vertex of each
triangle in the header.
But wait, there's more.
So for each vertex
index in each triangle,
and Now we're on to, for each vertex,
in each vertex index, in each triangle,
perform the following operations.
Those would be:
you get the vertex itself,
you multiply by the scale,
you add the translation,
and you have your vertex.
Calling GL vertex down at the bottom.
You specify your vertex so
OpenGL knows where you want it,
and you're good to go.
So as I mentioned,
this rendering engine--
or this rendering engine,
excuse me.
This rendering loop does
omit any sort of animation.
You would have to do quite a bit more.
You'd have to add quite a bit of code to
get the animations actually working here.
What you'd want to do
in that case would be,
as you drop down and start
rendering the vertices,
you'd want to execute that loop for
each frame of each animation that you
wanted to display at any given time.
Alternatively,
what you could do is you could
increment the frame number every
time a frame renders through your
rendering engine or for whatever
application you've got and continue
with your rendering loop that way.
As I mentioned,
on a per-vertex coordinate basis,
each vertex is an encoded byte.
You multiply by a scale,
you add the translation,
and you end up with a floating
point resultant vertex that
you can pass to OpenGL.
So a little bit about animation here.
I'm going to discuss key-framed
animation with vertex interpolation
between the key frames.
What exactly is key-frame animation?
If you're not familiar with it,
key-frame animation is
a series of snapshots.
For instance,
if you are at a racetrack and you're
watching a car travel around in a circle,
and you took various pictures of
it as it moved around the track,
those would be your key frames.
So if you were to view them in order,
you would actually see the
quote unquote "animation" of
the car moving around the track.
Well, what's wrong with that?
It's going to look really choppy.
So what do you do?
That's where vertex
interpolation comes in.
Between any two given key frames,
You can divide up the amount of time
that it takes to render each frame and
then interpolate a number of vertices
in between the key-frame vertices.
So you end up with a
much smoother animation.
Each frame in a key-frame
animation sequence contains a
complete set of vertex data.
It has all the texture coordinates,
all the vertex coordinates for
any model that it applies to.
As I mentioned,
it is a series of snapshots
over a given period of time.
Key-frame animation is very good
for things like simple rigid body
motion or for rendering any sort of
fixed animation in a game context.
For other things,
such as models that are going to be
interacting with your environment
and other dynamic sources of energy,
you would probably want to
move to something more complex,
such as a
Skeletal-based animation.
Key-frame animation will do the job,
but it's probably going
to look pretty choppy,
and it's going to be hard to
modify your key-frames on the fly.
This is kind of a graphical
representation of what a
key-frame animation looks like.
Each of these would be
considered a snapshot.
And as you progress through,
he goes from a standing--our marine
here goes from a standing position
all the way down to laying down.
If you were to play these through
one at a time at any amount of speed,
it's probably going
to look pretty choppy.
Again, that's where the vertex
interpolation would come in,
and you could smooth out the
animation to make it look much better.
What we're going to do is we're going
to interpolate the vertices linearly.
As in, there will be a fixed amount of
time between any two interpolations.
The number of actual interpolated
vertices is arbitrary.
It is purely based on your
frame rate at the time,
or you can actually hard-code it to where
you can lock it in to a particular rate.
So the basic equation is the
number of interpolations.
The number of interpolations is equal to
the animation speed from frame to frame.
[Transcript missing]
So for any given vertex,
you would have 15 more
in the middle of them.
That would smooth out
your animation sequence.
I've kind of gone through how
How to define a model format
and the necessary data that
you would want to have.
Went through loading and storage
and memory representation.
And showed some basic algorithms as
to how to display and animate a model.
If you want a little more
information on this kind of thing,
you can go to Apple's website
and the Apple OpenGL website,
as well as OpenGL.org.
Two really good books on
modeling are Real-Time Rendering
and 3D Graphics File Formats,
which is where I ended up
learning most of my information
from over the course of time.
The Principles of 3D
Computer Animation is also
another very good book,
and Advanced Animation and Rendering
Techniques are very good for just that,
animation.
As far as the roadmap goes,
408 tomorrow is OpenGL optimization.
Jeff discussed that earlier.
Advanced rendering will be
given by Troy Dawson tomorrow,
and our feedback forum
is tomorrow at 5:00 PM.
My contact information for anybody
who wants to get a hold of me.